1. The system of protection of fundamental rights and freedoms established by the European
Convention on Human Rights (“the Convention”) is based on the principle of subsidiarity. The
importance of this principle has been reaffirmed with the adoption and entry into force of Protocol
No. 15 to the Convention, which has introduced an explicit reference to it in the Preamble to the
Convention. The task of ensuring the application of the Convention falls primarily to the States
Parties to the Convention; the European Court of Human Rights (“the Court”) should intervene only
where States have failed in their obligations.
Supervision by Strasbourg is triggered mainly by individual applications, which may be lodged with
the Court by any individual or non-governmental legal entity located within the jurisdiction of a State
Party to the Convention. The pool of potential applicants is therefore vast: in addition to the eight
hundred million inhabitants of greater Europe and the nationals of third countries living there or in
transit, there are millions of associations, foundations, political parties, companies and so forth (not
to mention those persons who, as a result of extraterritorial acts committed by the States Parties to
the Convention outside their respective territories, fall within their jurisdiction).
For a number of years now, and owing to a variety of factors, the Court has been submerged by
individual applications (64,100 were pending as of 31 January 2021). The overwhelming majority of
these applications are, however, rejected without being examined on the merits for failure to satisfy
one of the admissibility criteria laid down by the Convention. For instance, in 2020, out of the 39,190
applications disposed of by the Court, 37,289 were declared inadmissible or struck out of the list of
cases. This situation is frustrating on two counts. Firstly, as the Court is required to respond to each
application, it is prevented from dealing within reasonable time-limits with those cases which
warrant examination on the merits, without the public deriving any real benefit. Secondly, tens of
thousands of applicants inevitably have their claims rejected.
2. The States Parties to the Convention, and also the Court and its Registry, have constantly sought
ways to tackle this problem and ensure effective administration of justice. One of the most visible
measures has been the adoption of Protocol No. 14 to the Convention. This provides, among other
things, for applications which are clearly inadmissible to be dealt with by a single judge assisted by
non-judicial rapporteurs, rather than by a three-judge committee. Protocol No. 14, which came into
force on 1 June 2010, also introduced a new admissibility criterion relating to the degree of
disadvantage suffered by the applicant, aimed at discouraging applications from persons who have
not suffered significant disadvantage.
On 19 February 2010, representatives of the forty-seven member States of the Council of Europe, all
of which are bound by the Convention, met in Interlaken in Switzerland to discuss the future of the
Court and, in particular, the backlog of cases resulting from the large number of inadmissible
applications. In a solemn declaration, they reaffirmed the Court’s central role in the European
system for the protection of fundamental rights and freedoms, and undertook to increase its
effectiveness while preserving the principle of individual application.
The need to ensure the viability of the Convention mechanism in the short, medium and long term
was further stressed in the declarations adopted at follow-up conferences in İzmir, Brighton,
Brussels and Copenhagen held in 2011, and 2012, 2015 and 2018 respectively. The Brighton
Conference led to the adoption of Protocol No. 15 to the Convention, which apart from inserting a
reference to the the principle of subsidiarity and the doctrine of the margin of appreciation into the
Convention’s Preamble, reduces from six to four months the time within which an application must
be lodged with the Court after a final national decision.
3. The idea of providing potential applicants with comprehensive and objective information on the
application procedure and admissibility criteria is expressly articulated in point C-6(a) and (b) of the 